# Ciliate-taxonomy-database
## Authors: Sripoorna Somasundaram and Zhongtang Yu (Department of Animal Sciences and Center of Microbiome Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH)
### Manuscript details: Internal Transcribed Spacers as Phylogenetic Markers Enable Species-level Metataxonomic Analysis of Ciliated Protozoa; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.02.578691 (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.02.578691v1).
  Ciliates can either be free-living or associated with other organisms as hosts such as ruminants. Free-living ciliates, having been classified into 12 different classes within the phylum Ciliophora, exhibit remarkable diversity, and can be found in various ecosystems worldwide [1]. In contrast, rumen ciliates only live in the rumen of various ruminants, both wild and domesticated, or similar habitats, and play a crucial role in feed digestion and efficiency, regulation of rumen pH, nitrogen metabolism, and methane emissions [2]. Despite their crucial roles, ciliates remain poorly understood in terms of diversity, population dynamics, and interactions with prokaryotic microbes. It is thus essential to uncover the often-overlooked diversity of ciliates and investigate their community profiles. To circumvent these limitations, researchers have used sequencing and analyzing of the small subunit ribosomal RNA (18S rRNA) gene for identification, classification, and community profiling of ciliates [3–5]. However, the highly conserved nature of the 18S rRNA gene limits its capability and utility in species-level taxonomic delimitation among eukaryotes, including ciliates [4, 7]. 
  We hypothesize that ITS1, ITS2, and the hypervariable regions of the 28S rRNA gene (hereafter all designated as alternative markers) could provide a finer phylogenetic resolution, thereby enhancing the taxonomic classification of ciliates, both free-living and host-associated. To test this hypothesis, we designed primers specifically targeting each alternative marker (for the 28S rRNA gene, only one hypervariable region with a length suitable for Illumina 2 x 300 paired-end sequencing) of ciliates and evaluated their utility in metataxonomic analysis of freshwater and rumen ciliates. Our findings demonstrate that these alternative phylogenetic markers, particularly ITS1, improve the taxonomic analysis of ciliate communities in freshwater and rumen environments beyond what is achievable using the 18S rRNA gene.
  For this study, we delevoped NCBI-ITS-Ref datbased and rumen ciliate database (RCORD). NCBI-ITS-Ref sequences were obtained from NCBI server, whereas RCROD database was prepared from the SAGs of rumen ciliates(obtained from Li et al., 2022 [8]). The 18S-ITS1-5.8S-ITS2-28S region of RCROD (of around 53 rumen ciliates) is deposited in GenBank and also in this GitHub for public access. Besides, the steps used for this database and/or classificaton of 7-8 different freshwater and rumen samples, are given here.
 
## References
Adl SM, Bass D, Lane CE, Lukeš J, Schoch CL, Smirnov A, et al. Revisions to the classification, nomenclature, and diversity of eukaryotes. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2019;66:4–119.  
Newbold CJ, De La Fuente G, Belanche A, Ramos-Morales E, McEwan NR. The role of ciliate protozoa in the rumen. Front Microbiol. 2015;6.  
Keller M, Zengler K. Tapping into microbial diversity. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004;2:141–50.  
Karnati SKR, Yu Z, Sylvester JT, Dehority BA, Morrison M, Firkins JL. Technical  note: specific PCR amplification of protozoan 18S rDNA sequences from DNA extracted from ruminal samples of cows. J Anim Sci. 2003;81:812–5. 
Clemmons BA, Shin SB, Smith TPL, Embree MM, Voy BH, Schneider LG, et al. Ruminal protozoal populations of Angus Steers differing in feed efficiency. Animals (Basel). 2021;11:1561. 
Shazib SUA, Vd’açny P, Slovák M, Gentekaki E, Shin MK. Deciphering phylogenetic relationships and delimiting species boundaries using a Bayesian coalescent approach in protists: a case study of the ciliate genus Spirostomum (Ciliophora, Heterotrichea). Sci Rep. 2019;9:16360.  
Stern R, Kraberg A, Bresnan E, Kooistra WHCF, Lovejoy C, Montresor M, et al. Molecular analyses of protists in long-term observation programmes—current status and future perspectives. J Plankton Res. 2018;40:519–36.  
Genomic insights into the phylogeny and biomass-degrading enzymes of rumen ciliates, ISME J 2022 Dec;16(12):2775-2787. doi: 10.1038/s41396-022-01306-8 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35986094/
 Li Z, Wang X, Zhang Y, Yu Z, Zhang T, Dai X, et al. Genomic insights into the phylogeny and biomass-degrading enzymes of rumen ciliates. ISME J. 2022;16:2775–87. 
